W-11862525-first-draft-for-beta-site-build-CP (#114)
mulesoft/docs-apikit: modules/ROOT/pages/apikit-odatav4-transform-to-sql-operation.adoc

= Transforming to SQL Query
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

> You can transform the input OData `GET` request to a SQL SELECT query with the `Transform to SQL Select` operation. This operation is useful when combined with the `select` operation of the Database Connector. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can transform the input OData `GET` request to an SQL SELECT query by using the `Transform to SQL Select` operation. This operation is useful when combined with the `select` operation of the Anypoint Connector for Database (Database Connector). 
```

Reviewer: Always spell out the connector name on first mention.

Author: OK! Thanks!

> image::transform-to-sql-transformer.png["Transform to SQL select element and tab highlighted"]

Reviewer: The alt text is not clear.

Author: OK! Thanks!

The output payload is a prepared statement and the attributes are a map of prepared statement parameters. 

> image::add-db-transform-to-sql.png["Select element and tab highlighted, as well as the attributes.queryparameters in the input parameters field"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::add-db-transform-to-sql.png["Select the highlighted element and tab and the attributes.queryparameters in the input parameters field."]
```

Author: OK! I think I understand the issue and I reword the alt text. Thanks!

> You can use this operation to work with the Mule DB connector to expose databases with OData V4.

Reviewer: Spell out the connector name: Database Connector. Is there a reason to have "Mule" in front of the connector name?

Reviewer: "with OData V4" - not clear what this is getting at - databases that use OData V4?

Author: No reason to use Mule!
And, yes! "with OData V4" means that the database uses OData V4.
Thanks!

> You can use this operation to work with the Mule DB connector to expose databases with OData V4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use this operation to work with the Mule Database connector to expose databases with OData v4.
```

> You can use this operation to work with the Mule DB connector to expose databases with OData V4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use this operation with the Database connector to expose databases with OData V4.
```

> image::serialize-transform-to-sql.png["Serialized entity element and tab highlighted, as well as the inbound content in the General section"]

Reviewer: I don't understand this alt text.
as well as > and

Author: I'll reword it to make it clearer. 
Thanks!

APIkit supports the following elements:

* System query options:
** $filter
** $select
** $search
** $orderby
** $skip
** $top
* Single entity
* Entity relation
* Server-side pagination

APIkit does not support the following elements:

* Parameter Aliases
* Built-in Filter Operations:
** has
** divby
* Built-in Query Functions, all except:
** contains
** startswith
** endwith
* $apply
* $compute
* $expand

== Transform to SQL Select Operation in OData V4

The OData protocol defines a series of conventions that enable clients to query identified resources by using URLs.

> The list of queryable entities, their fields, and the relationships between them are defined in a data model using simple HTTP messages.

Reviewer: using > by using
Can you leave out the word "simple"?

Author: OK! Thanks!

> The list of queryable entities, their fields, and the relationships between them are defined in a data model using simple HTTP messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list of queryable entities, their fields, and the relationships between them are defined in a data model by using simple HTTP messages.
```

Reviewer: From our style guide:

"using," "by using"
Clarify how you intend "using" to be understood. For example, consider the following two sentences:

Salesforce Composite Connector enables you to create SObject trees using ` Create sobject tree` .

Salesforce Composite Connector enables you to create SObject trees by using `Create sobject tree`.

Although both sound correct and could pass without a glance, if you examine the logic of the sentences, they mean something slightly different: the first could imply that trees use the syntax, whereas the second makes clear that the audience uses the syntax. "By" in the second sentence essentially means "by means of <doing this thing: in this case, "using">).

> OData shares some similarities with Java database connectivity (JDBC). The `transform-to-sql-select` operation uses such similarities to help you create SQL queries for the resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OData shares some similarities with Java database connectivity (JDBC). The `transform-to-sql-select` operation uses these similarities to help you create SQL queries for the identified resources.
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

The operation results in a message that has a prepared statement with the SQL `select` sentence as the payload and the parameters name and values map as the attributes.

> == Implement the Transform to SQL Select Operation Using APIkit for OData V4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Implement the Transform to SQL Select Operation by Using APIkit for OData V4
```

Reviewer: Global - using > by using

Author: OK! Thanks!

> You can implement the transform to SQL operation with the `<apikit-odata:transform-to-sql-select>` XML element, which has the following parameters:

Reviewer: with > by using?

Author: OK! Thanks!

[options="header"]
|====
| Parameter name | Description
| Display name | Name of the operation
| Module configuration | Name of the related-module configuration

> | Entity set name | Name of the entity set that you fetch #[attributes.entitySetName]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Entity set name | Name of the entity set to fetch #[attributes.entitySetName]
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

> | Page size | A number that defines the amount of results per page during server-side-pagination

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Page size | Number that defines the amount of results per page during server-side-pagination
```

Reviewer: should server-side-pagination be server-side pagination?

Author: It's server-side pagination.
Thanks!

> | Entity type name | A string obtained from the OData request using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes], which the entity data model specifies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Entity type name | String obtained from the OData request by using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes], which the entity data model specifies
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

> | Entity type fields | An array of strings obtained from the OData request using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes], which provides the list of property fields from the entity type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Entity type fields | Array of strings obtained from the OData request by using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes], which provides the list of property fields from the entity type
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

> | Entity type keys | An object obtained from the OData request using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes], which provides the map of entity key names and values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Entity type keys | Object obtained from the OData request by using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes], which provides a map of entity key names and values
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

> | System query options | Parameter obtained from the OData request using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| System query options | Parameter obtained from the OData request by using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes]
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

> | Search transformation enabled | Enables $search transformation to WHERE clause

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Search transformation enabled | Enables the $search transformation for a WHERE clause
```

Reviewer: $search transformation option?

Author: OK! Thanks!

> | Strict search term match | Enables full term match for $search. If enabled, terms in WHERE clause are not enclosed between '%'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Strict search term match | Enables full term matching for $search. If enabled, terms in the WHERE clause are not enclosed between '%'.
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

> | SQL identifiers delimiter a| Option that delimits identifiers in the generated SQL sentence (Options: DOUBLE_QUOTES, BRACKETS, and BACK_TICKS)

Reviewer: Is generated SQL a sentence? I think it would be better to say "text" or "command."

Author: Requesting assistance from SMEs.

Author: According to SMEs, the appropriate word is "statements".

Examples:

* DOUBLE_QUOTES: ``SELECT "TrackId", "Name" FROM "Tracks"``

* BRACKETS: ``SELECT [TrackId], [Name] FROM [Tracks]``

* BACK_TICKS: ``SELECT \`TrackId`, \`Name` FROM \`Tracks` ``

| SQL limit rows a| Option that limits the numbers of rows (Options: LIMIT and FETCH_NEXT_ROWS_ONLY)

Examples:

* LIMIT: ``SELECT OrderID, ShippedDate, ShipCountry FROM Orders LIMIT :parameter1``

* FETCH_NEXT_ROWS_ONLY: ``SELECT OrderID, ShippedDate, ShipCountry FROM Orders ORDER BY OrderID ASC OFFSET :parameter2 ROWS FETCH NEXT :parameter1 ROWS ONLY``

> `ORDER BY` is automatically included if not present in the request using the entity key defined in CSDL.

Reviewer: using > by using/that uses?

Author: OK! Thanks!

|====

== $filter Expressions in OData V4

> ​​The `$filter` expression in OData uses comparison, logical, arithmetic, and grouping operators. You can access the list operators with their corresponding meaning at http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/cs01/part1-protocol/odata-v4.01-cs01-part1-protocol.html#sec_BuiltinFilterOperations[the OData4 Specification^]. APIkit does not support `has` and `divby` operators.

Reviewer: Can you say "The OData `$filter` expression...? It is more direct.

> ​​The `$filter` expression in OData uses comparison, logical, arithmetic, and grouping operators. You can access the list operators with their corresponding meaning at http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/cs01/part1-protocol/odata-v4.01-cs01-part1-protocol.html#sec_BuiltinFilterOperations[the OData4 Specification^]. APIkit does not support `has` and `divby` operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
​​The OData `$filter` expression uses comparison, logical, arithmetic, and grouping operators. For a list of operators and their meaning, see http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/cs01/part1-protocol/odata-v4.01-cs01-part1-protocol.html#sec_BuiltinFilterOperations[the OData4 Specification^]. 

APIkit does not support the `has` and `divby` operators.
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

== Expressions Supported by Transform to SQL Select

> You can find the filtering expressions that OData supports in its http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/cs01/part1-protocol/odata-v4.01-cs01-part1-protocol.html#sec_BuiltinFilterOperations[specification^]. The `transform-to-sql-select` operation supports the following subset of unary and binary operators, and the following method operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the filtering expressions that OData supports see the http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/cs01/part1-protocol/odata-v4.01-cs01-part1-protocol.html#sec_BuiltinFilterOperations[specification^]. 

The `transform-to-sql-select` operation supports the following subset of unary and binary operators, and the following method operators.
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

=== Binary Operators in OData and in SQL

[options="header"]
|====
| OData Operator | SQL Operator
| add | +
| and | AND
| div | /
| eq | =
| ge | >=
| gt | >
| le | =<
| lt | <
| mod | %
| mul | *
| ne | <>
| or | OR
| sub | -
|====

=== Unary Operators in OData and in SQL

[options="header"]
|====
| OData Operator | SQL Operator
| not | NOT
| - | -
|====

=== Method Operators in OData and in SQL

[options="header"]
|====
| OData Operator | SQL Operator
| contains | LIKE %value%
| startswith | LIKE value%
| endswith | LIKE %value
|====

== $search Support

> The operation builds a `where` clause based on the `$search` expression the system query option provides. The implementation translates the search expression to select all the elements that have property values that match the condition. By default, a term matches if the field value “contains” the term, but it does not match if set as “strict” in the configuration. The following parameters define the `$search` feature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This operation builds a `where` clause based on the `$search` expression that the system query option provides. The implementation translates the search expression to select all of the elements that have property values that match the condition. By default, a term matches if the field value contains the term, but it does not match if set as `strict` in the configuration. 

The following parameters define the `$search` feature:
```

Reviewer: Elsewhere, you have WHERE clause instead of `where` clause.

Can you split up the above paragraph? I suggest splitting it at the text that starts with "By default..." and "The following parameters...."

Reviewer: I don't think that you need quotes around contains. Also, should strict have back ticks instead of quotes?

Author: You're right!
Thanks!

[options="header"]
|====
| Parameter Name | Description

> | Search transformation enabled | If `true`, it enables the transformation support for this option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Search transformation enabled | If `true`, enables the transformation support for this option.
```

> | Search transformation enabled | If `true`, it enables the transformation support for this option.

Reviewer: What option is this referring to?

Author: Reworded to "If `true`, this option enables transformation support."
Thanks!

> | Search transformation enabled | If `true`, it enables the transformation support for this option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Search transformation enabled | If `true`, this option enables transformation support.
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

> | Strict search term match | If `true`, it specifies that there is a match only if the field value contains exactly the same terms as the search expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Strict search term match | If `true`, this option specifies that there is a match only if the field value contains exactly the same terms as the search expression.
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

* Server-side pagination

APIkit does not support the following elements:

* Parameter Aliases
* Built-in Filter Operations:
** has
** divby
* Built-in Query Functions, all except:
** contains
** startswith
** endwith
* $apply
* $compute
* $expand

== Transform to SQL Select Operation in OData V4

The OData protocol defines a series of conventions that enable clients to query identified resources by using URLs.
The list of queryable entities, their fields, and the relationships between them are defined in a data model by using HTTP messages.
OData shares some similarities with Java database connectivity (JDBC). The `transform-to-sql-select` operation uses such similarities to help you create SQL queries for the resources.
The operation results in a message that has a prepared statement with the SQL `select` sentence as the payload and the parameters name and values map as the attributes.

== Implement the Transform to SQL Select Operation by Using APIkit for OData V4

You can implement the transform to SQL operation by using the `<apikit-odata:transform-to-sql-select>` XML element, which has the following parameters:

[options="header"]
|====
| Parameter name | Description

> | Display name | Name of the operation

Reviewer: Since there is a period in one description, out style is to put periods in all of them.

Author: OK! Thanks!

| Module configuration | Name of the related-module configuration
| Entity set name | Name of the entity set to fetch #[attributes.entitySetName]
| Page size | Number that defines the amount of results per page during server-side pagination
| Entity type name | String obtained from the OData request by using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes], which the entity data model specifies

> | Entity type fields | Array of strings obtained from the OData request by using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes], which provides the list of property fields from the entity type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Entity type fields | Array of strings obtained from the OData request by using #[attributes.odataRequestAttributes], which provides the list of property fields obtained from the entity type
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

Examples:

* DOUBLE_QUOTES: ``SELECT "TrackId", "Name" FROM "Tracks"``

* BRACKETS: ``SELECT [TrackId], [Name] FROM [Tracks]``

* BACK_TICKS: ``SELECT \`TrackId`, \`Name` FROM \`Tracks` ``

| SQL limit rows a| Option that limits the numbers of rows (Options: LIMIT and FETCH_NEXT_ROWS_ONLY)

Examples:

* LIMIT: ``SELECT OrderID, ShippedDate, ShipCountry FROM Orders LIMIT :parameter1``

* FETCH_NEXT_ROWS_ONLY: ``SELECT OrderID, ShippedDate, ShipCountry FROM Orders ORDER BY OrderID ASC OFFSET :parameter2 ROWS FETCH NEXT :parameter1 ROWS ONLY``

`ORDER BY` is automatically included if not present in the request by using the entity key defined in CSDL.

|====

== $filter Expressions in OData V4

​​The OData `$filter` expression uses comparison, logical, arithmetic, and grouping operators. For a list of operators and their meaning, see http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/cs01/part1-protocol/odata-v4.01-cs01-part1-protocol.html#sec_BuiltinFilterOperations[the OData4 Specification^]. 

APIkit does not support the `has` and `divby` operators.

== Expressions Supported by Transform to SQL Select

> For the filtering expressions that OData supports see the http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/cs01/part1-protocol/odata-v4.01-cs01-part1-protocol.html#sec_BuiltinFilterOperations[specification^]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the filtering expressions that OData supports, see the http://docs.oasis-open.org/odata/odata/v4.01/cs01/part1-protocol/odata-v4.01-cs01-part1-protocol.html#sec_BuiltinFilterOperations[specification^]. 
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

The `transform-to-sql-select` operation supports the following subset of unary and binary operators, and the following method operators.

=== Binary Operators in OData and in SQL

[options="header"]
|====
| OData Operator | SQL Operator
| add | +
| and | AND
| div | /
| eq | =
| ge | >=
| gt | >
| le | =<
| lt | <
| mod | %
| mul | *
| ne | <>
| or | OR
| sub | -
|====

=== Unary Operators in OData and in SQL

[options="header"]
|====
| OData Operator | SQL Operator
| not | NOT
| - | -
|====

=== Method Operators in OData and in SQL

[options="header"]
|====
| OData Operator | SQL Operator
| contains | LIKE %value%
| startswith | LIKE value%
| endswith | LIKE %value
|====

== $search Support

> This operation builds a `where` clause based on the `$search` expression that the system query option provides. The implementation translates the search expression to select all of the elements that have property values that match the condition. 

Author: We have `where` clauses and WHERE clauses. Are they different? If not, should they be spelled `where` or `WHERE`? Thanks!

Author: According to SMEs, both options are possible. But in this case, we need WHERE. Thanks for such a great catch! ;)

> This operation builds a `WHERE` clause based on the `$search` expression that the system query option provides. The implementation translates the search expression to select all of the elements that have property values that match the condition. 

Reviewer: Can you just say "The implementation selects all of the elements that have property values that match the condition?

Author: Requesting assistance from SME.
According to my understanding, the meaning is different:
In the original sentence, "the implementation translates the search expression".
In the other suggestion, "the implementation selects the elements".
What does the implementation do? Is the selection a consequence of the translation? Is the translation relevant to the customer?

Author: According to SMEs, the translation is not relevant to the customer so we can simplify the sentence ;) 
Thanks!
